
KIPP Chicago’s mission is to empower students with the character and academic skills necessary to succeed in top-quality high schools and universities, to be happy in the competitive world, and to have a positive impact on their communities.  Over the last decade KIPP Chicago has grown into the preeminent K-8 public charter school network in Chicago.  KIPP Chicago has led all K-8 schools (district-run and charter) in SQRP ratings the last two years and boasts the highest rated open enrollment school in the city. SQRP ratings emphasize student growth and achievement in mathematics and science above all else. 

While proud of our teachers’ efforts and our students’ academic performance,  KIPP Chicago’s  focus has not been on boosting test scores in and of itself. Rather it has been to foster the habits and skills needed to be very successful at college prep HSs and then to matriculate, persist, and graduate from college. Closing the achievement gap in tested subjects is a necessary step in realizing the vision of helping our students get to and through college. But while academic achievement is necessary, we also recognize that is not sufficient to realize our greatest hopes for and promises to our students.  Focusing a child’s education on any one domain is an incomplete approach that at best is myopic and at worst hobbles our student’s best efforts. 

Our schools’ have approaches have become increasingly holistic.   The long term success of our students requires  that each child, in each school, in each community, is healthy, safe, engaged, supported, and challenged.  Successfully attending to each of these aims for each student guarantees that we develop the abilities and maximize the potential of the whole child.


Context
KIPP Chicago believes that students who can access rigorous tasks, who can write eloquently and persuasively, and who can master the skills of logic and mathematical reasoning will be well prepared for rigours AP-level HS curricula. But for  years now we have been increasing our science, arts (including performing arts), humanities, and extracurricular offerings. We've also invested more heavily in social emotional learning and providing PD to teachers best support our students given their circumstances 


And while the concept of the educating the “whole child” has been around for a long time, interest in the concept has increased markedly in the last few years (including related, component concepts such as social-emotional learning, personalized learning, and trauma informed care).  For example, The following programs have been in place for two or more years at one or more KIPP Chicago campuses:
Performance and fine arts 
Restorative justice/peace circles
Mindfulness training for staff
Afterschool programming including arts, computer programming, gardening, music, dance, and Model UN
Social Justice Fair
Children’s Museum of Art and Social Justice
Conscious Leadership professional development for school leaders
Explicit instruction on character traits

Each of these endeavors gets an aspect of the whole child, but these efforts tend to be concentrated in one school or another, lack a unifying framework to strategically advocate for and carefully implement these initiatives, and we think are actually too focused on an individual child. Put another way, we are missing the forest for the trees (or that the most beautiful flowers required well tended gardens to flourish). 

KIPP Chicago’s Campaign for the Whole Child Fund
In order to secure the resources necessary to provide the best learning experience for every KIPPster, KIPP Chicago is inaugurating a new campaign.  The Whole Child Fund is an initiative to gather resources to expand student and teacher offerings that are investment  the long term success of our students, families, and communities.  s in each school, in each community, is healthy, safe, engaged, supported, and challenged.  To do so requires  expanded support, professional development, and offerings that themselves require expanded resources. 

We believe strongly that these efforts need to be authentic And the offerings that support the whole child should reflect the needs of our communities as identified by students, families, and staff. 

A suggested framework for organizing our programming 
The 2x2 table below is a suggestion for how KIPP Chicago could organize our thinking around Whole Child Fund initiatives and programming.  We have borrowed heavily from the ASCD’s definition of a whole child approach to education: namely, that a such an approach: 
 
. . . is defined by policies, practices, and relationships that ensure each child, in each school, in each community, is healthy, safe, engaged, supported, and challenged.

We lean on this definition because it enumerates a set of domains that when attended to encourages human flourishing in each child.  But these domains can equally be applied to schools themselves as well as the communities of which they are a part.  We can recast the ASCD definition thusly:

A whole child approach ensures that each child, each school, and each community is healthy, safe, engaged, supported, and challenged. 
 

A school that is healthy increases the number of healthy students, a community that is safe increases the number of safe students.  An engaged school shows the way for students to be engaged, a well-supported community supports it’s children.

The table below can be used to situate an initiative (e.g.,  trauma-informed care training, advocating for healthier food options, implementing new curriculum,  improving a playground)  in the context of how it helps develop the whole child. It can directly via an SEL program, which both challenges and supports students. Less directly are initiatives that support the well-being of teachers and staff.    An adult GED program directly supports the community and indirectly the school and child.   Working with other community leaders to advocate for economic development or effective violence reduction initiative creates supports a safe and engaged community. 

The aim of the table is to help us think through each current and planned WCF initiative and map its effect on student, staff, and families across the whole child domains.  It also helps present a unified view of our work both internally and externally.  
 


Child
School
Community
Challenge






Engage






Support






Healthy






Safe








For example consider a hosting a farmers’ market; the initiative could be scored by indicating which intersections of :  



Child
School
Community
Challenge






Engage






Support






Healthy






Safe








Ongoing  and proposed initiatives at KIPP Chicago
Well-being
These initiatives aim to increase the overall well-being of our students, staff, and families but provide resources, training, and opportunities that increase happiness and comfort:

Teacher well-being 
Region wide mindfulness and trauma-informed care training from Pure Edge 
Free and discounted health, well-being, and time saving services
Drycleaning delivery
Bath and spa services
Spinning classes 
Yoga classes
Free Financial advising (starting in school year 2019-2020)
High design teacher work spaces (a la WeWork, Wings, 1871, Soho House)
Fill-in support via teacher fellows for teacher sick days and leaves
2 extra well-being days for teaching staff
Director of Well-being position  


 
Parent and community well-being
Partnership with Penn Foster to offer HS Diploma/GED classes and testing 
The Formula inspired programming including:
Incentives for family library card usage
Distribute free museum passes/monthly family museum excursions
Transportation to free public events (like summer concert series) 
Whole Child Magazine
Farmers markets that accept food stamps
Conscious parenting resources and classes
Food Pantries with Washer/Dryer facilities at all campuses

Student well-being
Passion project fund
Increased afterschool programming to increase sense of inclusion, belonging, and engagement
“Black Achievers” career and job fair
McNair Fellowship inspired mentorship program linking professionals/scientists with students
Life skills and sex education programming
Identity statement workshops




Whole Child related resources
Feel free to add any resources here that we need to look into and read about
Lea Crusey docs 
Rebecca Pepp has resources
IL state funding cuts leading to less mental health spending that affects us. 



